---
# This title is used for search results
title: Ansible Collection Role anta_runner
---
<!--
  ~ Copyright (c) 2024-2025 Arista Networks, Inc.
  ~ Use of this source code is governed by the Apache License 2.0
  ~ that can be found in the LICENSE file.
  -->

# Preview - anta_runner

!!! warning
    `anta_runner` is in preview. Everything is subject to change and **not officially supported for production environments**.

    If you have any questions, please leverage the GitHub [discussions board](https://github.com/aristanetworks/ansible-avd/discussions)

## Overview

**anta_runner** is a role leveraged to validate Arista EOS devices' operational states using the [Arista Network Test Automation (ANTA)](https://anta.arista.com) framework.

By default, the role generates a per-device test catalog based on the AVD structured configurations and executes the ANTA tests against the devices defined in the Ansible inventory.

It can also be used to execute user-defined ANTA test catalogs in conjunction with the Ansible inventory, providing similar functionality and options as the [ANTA CLI](https://anta.arista.com/stable/cli/overview/) while benefiting from Ansible's inventory management capabilities.

Results are reported in various formats, including JSON, CSV, and Markdown.

## Relationship to `eos_validate_state`

The `anta_runner` role is designed to eventually replace the existing `eos_validate_state` role with several key improvements:

- **Tighter ANTA integration:** Direct access to ANTA's full capabilities and automatic adoption of new ANTA features and improvements, including new tests.
- **Smarter test generation:** Generated tests by AVD are now more intelligent and condensed, improving execution efficiency by grouping required inputs per test and reducing the number of commands sent to devices.
- **Improved performance:** Uses multiprocessing to run tests in parallel batches, improving execution time for large environments.
- **Enhanced filtering:** Provides more granular control over test execution through multiple filtering mechanisms.

Users of `eos_validate_state` are encouraged to migrate to `anta_runner` to benefit from these improvements.

## Requirements

Requirements are located in the AVD [installation](../../../../../docs/installation/collection-installation.md#python-requirements-installation) documentation.

## Basic Example

This example will generate a per-device test catalog based on the AVD structured configurations and execute the ANTA tests against all devices in the inventory group `FABRIC`:

```yaml title="playbook.yml"
---
- name: Run ANTA
  hosts: FABRIC # <-- Targeted devices
  connection: local
  gather_facts: false
  tasks:
    - name: Run ANTA on EOS devices
      import_role:
        name: arista.avd.anta_runner
```

The artifacts generated by the role, including results from ANTA, will be stored in the `anta` folder in the inventory directory.

## Roadmap

This feature is still under development, and several planned features are not implemented yet:

- Dynamic HTML report
- Granular results in reporting (e.g., executed commands, inputs per test, etc.)
- Per-device catalog output in YAML (currently only JSON)
- Merged catalog output for all devices (AVD-generated + user-defined catalogs)
- Hosts and groups validation in the filters
- Add unit tests
- Improve documentation with more examples and details on the generated tests by AVD
- Add more [ANTA tests](https://anta.arista.com/stable/api/tests/) to the AVD-generated catalogs

## Understanding ANTA Catalogs

The `anta_runner` role works with two types of test catalogs:

1. **AVD-generated catalogs:** These are automatically created based on the structured configurations of your devices. They contain tests tailored to both device-specific configurations and the network design.
2. **User-defined catalogs:** These are custom ANTA test catalogs that you can create yourself and provide to the role. They allow you to add any tests available in the ANTA framework.

Different filtering mechanisms are used depending on the catalog type, explained in the [Advanced Filtering Options](#advanced-filtering-options) sections.

## Role Inputs and Outputs

Figure 1 below provides a visualization of the role's inputs, outputs executed by the role.

To be added.

### Workflow Overview

The role follows this workflow by default:

1. Setup logging for the role and ANTA
2. Load the structured configurations generated by AVD for the targeted devices
3. Build the per-device AVD-generated catalogs
4. Launch multiple instances of ANTA to run tests against the devices
5. Generate JSON, CSV, and Markdown reports with the results

### EOS Device Configuration

By default, this role will generate the AVD-generated catalog and execute the ANTA tests against all hosts targeted by the Ansible "play".

```yaml title="playbook.yml"
---
- name: Run ANTA
  hosts: FABRIC # <-- Targeted devices
  connection: local
  gather_facts: false
  tasks:
    - name: Run ANTA on EOS devices
      import_role:
        name: arista.avd.anta_runner
```

This playbook targets the Ansible inventory group `FABRIC`, so all devices under this group will be targeted for the catalog generation and test execution.

!!! tip
    It is possible to only test a subset of this group by supplying the `--limit <hostname or group>,<hostname or group>` flag to the `ansible-playbook` command.

You can also manually supply a list of devices:

```yaml
# Run ANTA for these devices.
# Defaults to all hosts in the play.
# This means the role must be imported/included in a play targeting only the
# relevant EOS devices - *not* CloudVision.
anta_devices: [ DC1-LEAF1A, DC1-LEAF1B ]
```

!!! note
    The device name is used directly to find the EOS structured configuration files.
    This means the device names are case sensitive and must match the file names.

Devices with `is_deployed: false` set as part of `eos_designs` inputs will automatically be ignored.

!!! note
    When excluding devices from a run, whether by using `--limit` or `anta_devices`, tests that rely on the excluded devices will not be executed. For example, if a test requires information from a device that is not included, the test will be skipped. The same behavior applies with `is_deployed: false` devices.

The role connects to EOS devices via eAPI using HTTP/HTTPS, so the devices must be accessible from the Ansible control node. The Ansible connection variables must be set accordingly:

```yaml
# The IP/name of the target host to use instead of inventory_hostname.
ansible_host: <str>

# The user Ansible logs in as.
ansible_user: <str>

# One of the following must be set for the authentication.
ansible_password: <str>
ansible_httpapi_pass: <str>
ansible_httpapi_password: <str>

# Some tests require elevated privileges to run (enable mode).
ansible_become: <bool; default=false>
ansible_become_password: <str>

# eAPI port and SSL verification.
ansible_httpapi_port: <int; default=80 or 443 depending on ansible_httpapi_use_ssl>
ansible_httpapi_use_ssl: <bool; default=true>
```

### Role Behavior Configuration

These settings allow modifying the default behavior as needed. The values below are the default values:

```yaml
# Enable AVD catalogs generation. Can be disabled if only user-defined catalogs are used.
avd_catalogs_enabled: true

# Generate tests for BGP peers in VRFs.
avd_catalogs_allow_bgp_vrfs: false

# Global timeout for the ANTA runner. Depending on the scale this can be adjusted.
anta_runner_timeout: 30

# ANTA runner batch size. This controls the number of devices that will be processed in parallel.
# 5-10 is a good starting point.
anta_runner_batch_size: 5

# Run ANTA in dry-run mode. This will generate the tests but not execute them.
anta_runner_dry_run: false
```

!!! tip
    The role automatically respects the `ansible_forks` setting to determine the maximum number of worker processes in conjunction with `anta_runner_batch_size`. For large deployment with many devices, consider adjusting these settings to optimize performance while managing resource usage.

### Verbose Mode and Logging

The `anta_runner` role supports default Ansible verbosity levels, controlled by the `-v` flag. With `-vvv`, comprehensive debug logs are generated, including:

- Information about tests being skipped from the AVD generation process and why
- Full ANTA logs stored per batch in the `anta_runner_logs_dir` directory

For example, to run with verbose logging:

```shell
ansible-playbook playbooks/fabric-validate.yml -vvv
```

### Advanced Filtering Options

Optional filtering mechanisms are available to modify the behavior of the role.

#### Tag-Based Filtering

`anta_runner_tags`: When using user-defined catalogs, tags can be used to filter which tests to run on which devices. These tags are used in conjunction with the `anta_tags` variable assigned to devices in the Ansible inventory.

```yaml
# In the inventory file
all:
  children:
    FABRIC:
      hosts:
        DC1-LEAF1A:
          anta_tags: [ leaf ]  # <-- Tag this device with 'leaf'
        DC1-SPINE1:
          anta_tags: [ spine ] # <-- Tag this device with 'spine'

# In a user-defined catalog
anta.tests.vxlan:
  - VerifyVxlan1Interface:
      filters:
        tags: [ leaf ] # <-- Tag this test with 'leaf'

# In the playbook
- name: Run ANTA
  hosts: FABRIC
  connection: local
  gather_facts: false
  tasks:
    - name: Run ANTA on EOS devices
      import_role:
        name: arista.avd.anta_runner
      vars:
        avd_catalogs_enabled: false  # <-- Disable AVD-generated catalogs to use only user-defined catalogs
        anta_runner_tags: [ leaf ]   # <-- Only run tests tagged with 'leaf' on devices with 'leaf' tag
```

!!! warning
    Tests in the AVD-generated catalogs are tagged with the device's hostname only. This means using `anta_runner_tags` with other tags than any device's hostname will skip all AVD-generated tests. To run/skip tests from the AVD-generated catalogs, use the `anta_runner_filters` variable as described below.

#### Test-Based Filtering

`anta_runner_filters`: Filters used to run or skip tests from the AVD-generated catalogs. These filters do **not** apply to user-defined catalogs, use `anta_runner_tags` for that. See the [AVD test index](#avd-generated-catalog-test-index) for the available tests.

```yaml
# In the playbook
- name: Run ANTA
  hosts: FABRIC
  connection: local
  gather_facts: false
  tasks:
    - name: Run ANTA on EOS devices
      import_role:
        name: arista.avd.anta_runner
      vars:
        avd_catalogs_filters:
          # Skip VerifyNTP for all devices in the DC1 Ansible inventory group
          - device_list: "{{ groups['DC1'] }}"
            skip_tests: [ VerifyNTP ]
          # Only run VerifyLLDPNeighbors for DC2-LEAF1A and DC2-LEAF1B
          - device_list: [ "DC2-LEAF1A", "DC2-LEAF1B" ]
            run_tests: [ VerifyLLDPNeighbors]
```

!!! note
    `skip_tests` takes precedence over `run_tests`. If the same test is in both lists, it will be skipped and other tests will be run.

#### Report Filtering

`anta_report_hide_statuses`: A list of test result statuses to hide from the generated reports. The available statuses are `success`, `failure`, `error`, `skipped`, and `unset`.

```yaml
# In the playbook
- name: Run ANTA
  hosts: FABRIC
  connection: local
  gather_facts: false
  tasks:
    - name: Run ANTA on EOS devices
      import_role:
        name: arista.avd.anta_runner
      vars:
        anta_report_hide_statuses: [ success, skipped ]
```

### Directory Configuration

The EOS device AVD structured configurations are read from files generated by `arista.avd.eos_designs` role.

The directories are configured with the same variables as for the other AVD roles:

```yaml
# Root directory.
root_dir: "{{ inventory_dir }}"

# Main output directory used in AVD.
output_dir_name: "intended"
output_dir: "{{ root_dir }}/{{ output_dir_name }}"

# Output for structured configuration files.
structured_dir_name: "structured_configs"
structured_dir: "{{ output_dir }}/{{ structured_dir_name }}"

# Structured configuration file format. Supported formats: yml, yaml, json.
avd_structured_config_file_format: "yml"
```

The ANTA-related directories for the role are configured as follows:

```yaml
# Main directory for the ANTA-related files.
anta_dir_name: "anta"
anta_dir: "{{ root_dir }}/{{ anta_dir_name }}"

# Directory for ANTA user-defined catalog files. These are the catalogs created by the user.
# The role will search for valid ANTA catalogs in this directory
# and merge them with each device's AVD-generated catalog.
user_catalogs_dir_name: "user_catalogs"
user_catalogs_dir: "{{ anta_dir }}/{{ user_catalogs_dir_name }}"

# Directory for AVD-generated ANTA catalogs. Per-device catalogs will be stored here.
avd_catalogs_dir_name: "avd_catalogs"
avd_catalogs_dir: "{{ anta_dir }}/{{ avd_catalogs_dir_name }}"

# Directory for the ANTA debug's logs. When running the role with `-vvv`,
# all ANTA logs will be stored here by batch.
anta_runner_logs_dir_name: "logs"
anta_runner_logs_dir: "{{ anta_dir }}/{{ anta_runner_logs_dir_name }}"

# Directory for ANTA reports.
anta_reports_dir_name: "reports"
anta_reports_dir: "{{ anta_dir }}/{{ anta_reports_dir_name }}"

# Paths for the generated reports. Supports JSON, CSV, and Markdown.
anta_report_json_path: "{{ anta_reports_dir }}/anta_report.json"
anta_report_md_path: "{{ anta_reports_dir }}/anta_report.md"
anta_report_csv_path: "{{ anta_reports_dir }}/anta_report.csv"
```

## AVD-generated Catalog Test Index

Below is a list of ANTA tests generated by AVD. As of this writing, ANTA supports close to 200 different [tests](https://anta.arista.com/stable/api/tests/). As mentioned in the roadmap, the goal is to include all relevant tests from the ANTA framework and generate the inputs automatically from the AVD structured configurations. Feel free to contribute to the AVD project to help us reach this goal!

- VerifyAPIHttpsSSL
- VerifyAVTRole
- VerifyBGPPeerSession
- VerifyEnvironmentSystemCooling
- VerifyInterfacesStatus
- VerifyLLDPNeighbors
- VerifyMlagStatus
- VerifyNTP
- VerifyReachability
- VerifyReloadCause
- VerifyRoutingProtocolModel
- VerifySpecificIPSecConn
- VerifyStunClientTranslation
- VerifyTemperature
- VerifyTransceiversTemperature

## License

Project is published under [Apache 2.0 License](https://github.com/aristanetworks/avd/blob/devel/LICENSE).

## Known Issues

- `[__NSCFConstantString initialize] may have been in progress in another thread when fork() was called.` This issue affects OSX users only and is covered in Ansible documentation: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/faq.html#running-on-macos-as-a-control-node.
